'\" t
.\" Copyright (c) 2020 David Howells <dhowells@redhat.com>
.\"
.\" %%%LICENSE_START(VERBATIM)
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
.\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
.\" entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one.
.\"
.\" Since the Linux kernel and libraries are constantly changing, this
.\" manual page may be incorrect or out-of-date.  The author(s) assume no
.\" responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from
.\" the use of the information contained herein.  The author(s) may not
.\" have taken the same level of care in the production of this manual,
.\" which is licensed free of charge, as they might when working
.\" professionally.
.\"
.\" Formatted or processed versions of this manual, if unaccompanied by
.\" the source, must acknowledge the copyright and authors of this work.
.\" %%%LICENSE_END
.\"
.TH FSCONFIG 2 2020-08-24 "Linux" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.SH NAME
fsconfig \- Filesystem parameterisation
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
.B #include <sys/types.h>
.B #include <sys/mount.h>
.B #include <unistd.h>
.B #include <sys/mount.h>
.PP
.BI "int fsconfig(int *" fd ", unsigned int " cmd ", const char *" key ,
.br
.BI "             const void __user *" value ", int " aux ");"
.br
.BI
.fi
.PP
.IR Note :
There is no glibc wrapper for this system call.
.SH DESCRIPTION
.PP
.BR fsconfig ()
is used to supply parameters to and issue commands against a filesystem
configuration context as set up by
.BR fsopen (2)
or
.BR fspick (2).
The context is supplied attached to the file descriptor specified by
.I fd
argument.
.PP
The
.I cmd
argument indicates the command to be issued, where some of the commands simply
supply parameters to the context.  The meaning of
.IR key ", " value " and " aux
are command-dependent; unless required for the command, these should be set to
NULL or 0.
.PP
The available commands are:
.TP
.B FSCONFIG_SET_FLAG
Set the parameter named by
.IR key
to true.  This may fail with error
.B EINVAL
if the parameter requires an argument.
.TP
.B FSCONFIG_SET_STRING
Set the parameter named by
.I key
to a string.  This may fail with error
.B EINVAL
if the parser doesn't want a parameter here, wants a non-string or the string
cannot be interpreted appropriately.
.I value
points to a NUL-terminated string.
.TP
.B FSCONFIG_SET_BINARY
Set the parameter named by
.I key
to be a binary blob argument.  This may cause
.B EINVAL
to be returned if the filesystem parser isn't expecting a binary blob and it
can't be converted to something usable.
.I value
points to the data and
.I aux
indicates the size of the data.
.TP
.B FSCONFIG_SET_PATH
Set the parameter named by
.I key
to the object at the provided path.
.I value
should point to a NUL-terminated pathname string and aux may indicate
.B AT_FDCWD
or a file descriptor indicating a directory from which to begin a relative
path resolution.  This may fail with error
.B EINVAL
if the parameter isn't expecting a path; it may also fail if the path cannot
be resolved with the typcal errors for that
.RB "(" ENOENT ", " ENOTDIR ", " EPERM ", " EACCES ", etc.)."
.IP
Note that FSCONFIG_SET_STRING can be used instead, implying AT_FDCWD.
.TP
.B FSCONFIG_SET_PATH_EMPTY
As FSCONFIG_SET_PATH, but with
.B AT_EMPTY_PATH
applied to the pathwalk.
.TP
.B FSCONFIG_SET_FD
Set the parameter named by
.I key
to the file descriptor specified by
.IR aux .
This will fail with
.B EINVAL
if the parameter doesn't expect a file descriptor or
.B EBADF
if the file descriptor is invalid.
.IP
Note that FSCONFIG_SET_STRING can be used instead with the file descriptor
passed as a decimal string.
.TP
.B FSCONFIG_CMD_CREATE
This command triggers the filesystem to take the parameters set in the context
and to try to create filesystem representation in the kernel.  If an existing
representation can be shared, the filesystem may do that instead if the
parameters permit.  This is intended for use with
.BR fsopen (2).
.TP
.B FSCONFIG_CMD_RECONFIGURE
This command causes the driver to alter the parameters of an already live
filesystem instance according to the parameters stored in the context.  This
is intended for use with
.BR fspick (2),
but may also by used against the context created by
.BR fsopen()
after
.BR fsmount (2)
has been called on it.

.\"________________________________________________________
.SH EXAMPLES
.PP
.in +4n
.nf
fsconfig(sfd, FSCONFIG_SET_FLAG, "ro", NULL, 0);

fsconfig(sfd, FSCONFIG_SET_STRING, "user_xattr", "false", 0);

fsconfig(sfd, FSCONFIG_SET_BINARY, "ms_pac", pac_buffer, pac_size);

fsconfig(sfd, FSCONFIG_SET_PATH, "journal", "/dev/sdd4", AT_FDCWD);

dirfd = open("/dev/", O_PATH);
fsconfig(sfd, FSCONFIG_SET_PATH, "journal", "sdd4", dirfd);

fd = open("/overlays/mine/", O_PATH);
fsconfig(sfd, FSCONFIG_SET_PATH_EMPTY, "lower_dir", "", fd);

pipe(pipefds);
fsconfig(sfd, FSCONFIG_SET_FD, "fd", NULL, pipefds[1]);
.fi
.in
.PP
.SH RETURN VALUE
On success, the function returns 0.  On error, \-1 is returned, and
.I errno
is set appropriately.
.SH ERRORS
The error values given below result from filesystem type independent
errors.
Each filesystem type may have its own special errors and its
own special behavior.
See the Linux kernel source code for details.
.TP
.B EACCES
A component of a path was not searchable.
(See also
.BR path_resolution (7).)
.TP
.B EACCES
Mounting a read-only filesystem was attempted without specifying the
.RB ' ro '
parameter.
.TP
.B EACCES
A specified block device is located on a filesystem mounted with the
.B MS_NODEV
option.
.\" mtk: Probably: write permission is required for MS_BIND, with
.\" the error EPERM if not present; CAP_DAC_OVERRIDE is required.
.TP
.B EBADF
The file descriptor given by
.I fd
or possibly by
.I aux
(depending on the command) is invalid.
.TP
.B EBUSY
The context attached to
.I fd
is in the wrong state for the given command.
.TP
.B EBUSY
The filesystem representation cannot be reconfigured read-only because it still
holds files open for writing.
.TP
.B EFAULT
One of the pointer arguments points outside the accessible address space.
.TP
.B EINVAL
.I fd
does not refer to a filesystem configuration context.
.TP
.B EINVAL
One of the source parameters referred to an invalid superblock.
.TP
.B ELOOP
Too many links encountered during pathname resolution.
.TP
.B ENAMETOOLONG
A path name was longer than
.BR MAXPATHLEN .
.TP
.B ENOENT
A pathname was empty or had a nonexistent component.
.TP
.B ENOMEM
The kernel could not allocate sufficient memory to complete the call.
.TP
.B ENOTBLK
Once of the parameters does not refer to a block device (and a device was
required).
.TP
.B ENOTDIR
.IR pathname ,
or a prefix of
.IR source ,
is not a directory.
.TP
.B EOPNOTSUPP
The command given by
.I cmd
was not valid.
.TP
.B ENXIO
The major number of a block device parameter is out of range.
.TP
.B EPERM
The caller does not have the required privileges.
.SH CONFORMING TO
These functions are Linux-specific and should not be used in programs intended
to be portable.
.SH VERSIONS
.BR fsconfig ()
was added to Linux in kernel 5.2.
.SH NOTES
Glibc does not (yet) provide a wrapper for the
.BR fsconfig ()
system call; call it using
.BR syscall (2).
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR mountpoint (1),
.BR fsmount (2),
.BR fsopen (2),
.BR fspick (2),
.BR mount_namespaces (7),
.BR path_resolution (7)
