'\" t
.\" Copyright (c) 2020 David Howells <dhowells@redhat.com>
.\"
.\" %%%LICENSE_START(VERBATIM)
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
.\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
.\" entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one.
.\"
.\" Since the Linux kernel and libraries are constantly changing, this
.\" manual page may be incorrect or out-of-date.  The author(s) assume no
.\" responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from
.\" the use of the information contained herein.  The author(s) may not
.\" have taken the same level of care in the production of this manual,
.\" which is licensed free of charge, as they might when working
.\" professionally.
.\"
.\" Formatted or processed versions of this manual, if unaccompanied by
.\" the source, must acknowledge the copyright and authors of this work.
.\" %%%LICENSE_END
.\"
.TH FSOPEN 2 2020-08-07 "Linux" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.SH NAME
fsopen, fsmount \- Filesystem parameterisation and mount creation
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
.B #include <sys/types.h>
.B #include <sys/mount.h>
.B #include <unistd.h>
.BR "#include <fcntl.h>           " "/* Definition of AT_* constants */"
.PP
.BI "int fsopen(const char *" fsname ", unsigned int " flags );
.PP
.BI "int fsmount(int " fd ", unsigned int " flags ", unsigned int " mount_attrs );
.fi
.PP
.IR Note :
There are no glibc wrappers for these system calls.
.SH DESCRIPTION
.PP
.BR fsopen ()
creates a blank filesystem configuration context within the kernel for the
filesystem named in the
.I fsname
parameter, puts it into creation mode and attaches it to a file descriptor,
which it then returns.  The file descriptor can be marked close-on-exec by
setting
.B FSOPEN_CLOEXEC
in
.IR flags .
.PP
After calling fsopen(), the file descriptor should be passed to the
.BR fsconfig (2)
system call, using that to specify the desired filesystem and security
parameters.
.PP
When the parameters are all set, the
.BR fsconfig ()
system call should then be called again with
.B FSCONFIG_CMD_CREATE
as the command argument to effect the creation.
.RS
.PP
.BR "[!]\ NOTE" :
Depending on the filesystem type and parameters, this may rather share an
existing in-kernel filesystem representation instead of creating a new one.
In such a case, the parameters specified may be discarded or may overwrite the
parameters set by a previous mount - at the filesystem's discretion.
.RE
.PP
The file descriptor also serves as a channel by which more comprehensive error,
warning and information messages may be retrieved from the kernel using
.BR read (2).
.PP
Once the creation command has been successfully run on a context, the context
will not accept further configuration.  At
this point,
.BR fsmount ()
should be called to create a mount object.
.PP
.BR fsmount ()
takes the file descriptor returned by
.BR fsopen ()
and creates a mount object for the filesystem root specified there.  The
attributes of the mount object are set from the
.I mount_attrs
parameter.  The attributes specify the propagation and mount restrictions to
be applied to accesses through this mount.
.PP
The mount object is then attached to a new file descriptor that looks like one
created by
.BR open "(2) with " O_PATH " or " open_tree (2).
This can be passed to
.BR move_mount (2)
to attach the mount object to a mountpoint, thereby completing the process.
.PP
The file descriptor returned by fsmount() is marked close-on-exec if
FSMOUNT_CLOEXEC is specified in
.IR flags .
.PP
After fsmount() has completed, the context created by fsopen() is reset and
moved to reconfiguration state, allowing the new superblock to be
reconfigured.  See
.BR fspick (2)
for details.
.PP
To use either of these calls, the caller requires the appropriate privilege
(Linux: the
.B CAP_SYS_ADMIN
capability).
.PP
.SS Message Retrieval Interface
The context file descriptor may be queried for message strings at any time by
calling
.BR read (2)
on the file descriptor.  This will return formatted messages that are prefixed
to indicate their class:
.TP
\fB"e <message>"\fP
An error message string was logged.
.TP
\fB"i <message>"\fP
An informational message string was logged.
.TP
\fB"w <message>"\fP
An warning message string was logged.
.PP
Messages are removed from the queue as they're read.
.SH RETURN VALUE
On success, both functions return a file descriptor.  On error, \-1 is
returned, and
.I errno
is set appropriately.
.SH ERRORS
The error values given below result from filesystem type independent
errors.
Each filesystem type may have its own special errors and its
own special behavior.
See the Linux kernel source code for details.
.TP
.B EBUSY
The context referred to by
.I fd
is not in the right state to be used by
.BR fsmount ().
.TP
.B EFAULT
One of the pointer arguments points outside the user address space.
.TP
.B EINVAL
.I flags
had an invalid flag set.
.TP
.B EINVAL
.I mount_attrs,
includes invalid
.BR MOUNT_ATTR_*
flags.
.TP
.B EMFILE
The system has too many open files to create more.
.TP
.B ENFILE
The process has too many open files to create more.
.TP
.B ENODEV
The filesystem
.I fsname
is not available in the kernel.
.TP
.B ENOMEM
The kernel could not allocate sufficient memory to complete the call.
.TP
.B EPERM
The caller does not have the required privileges.
.SH CONFORMING TO
These functions are Linux-specific and should not be used in programs intended
to be portable.
.SH VERSIONS
.BR fsopen "(), and " fsmount ()
were added to Linux in kernel 5.2.
.SH NOTES
Glibc does not (yet) provide a wrapper for the
.BR fsopen "() or " fsmount "()"
system calls; call them using
.BR syscall (2).
.SH EXAMPLES
To illustrate the process, here's an example whereby this can be used to mount
an ext4 filesystem on /dev/sdb1 onto /mnt.
.PP
.in +4n
.nf
sfd = fsopen("ext4", FSOPEN_CLOEXEC);
fsconfig(sfd, FSCONFIG_SET_FLAG, "ro", NULL, 0);
fsconfig(sfd, FSCONFIG_SET_STRING, "source", "/dev/sdb1", 0);
fsconfig(sfd, FSCONFIG_SET_FLAG, "noatime", NULL, 0);
fsconfig(sfd, FSCONFIG_SET_FLAG, "acl", NULL, 0);
fsconfig(sfd, FSCONFIG_SET_FLAG, "user_attr", NULL, 0);
fsconfig(sfd, FSCONFIG_SET_FLAG, "iversion", NULL, 0);
fsconfig(sfd, FSCONFIG_CMD_CREATE, NULL, NULL, 0);
mfd = fsmount(sfd, FSMOUNT_CLOEXEC, MS_RELATIME);
move_mount(mfd, "", AT_FDCWD, "/mnt", MOVE_MOUNT_F_EMPTY_PATH);
.fi
.in
.PP
Here, an ext4 context is created first and attached to sfd.  The context is
then told where its source will be, given a bunch of options and a superblock
record object is then created.  Then fsmount() is called to create a mount
object and
.BR move_mount (2)
is called to attach it to its intended mountpoint.
.PP
And here's an example of mounting from an NFS server and setting a Smack
security module label on it too:
.PP
.in +4n
.nf
sfd = fsopen("nfs", 0);
fsconfig(sfd, FSCONFIG_SET_STRING, "source", "example.com:/pub", 0);
fsconfig(sfd, FSCONFIG_SET_STRING, "nfsvers", "3", 0);
fsconfig(sfd, FSCONFIG_SET_STRING, "rsize", "65536", 0);
fsconfig(sfd, FSCONFIG_SET_STRING, "wsize", "65536", 0);
fsconfig(sfd, FSCONFIG_SET_STRING, "smackfsdef", "foolabel", 0);
fsconfig(sfd, FSCONFIG_SET_FLAG, "rdma", NULL, 0);
fsconfig(sfd, FSCONFIG_CMD_CREATE, NULL, NULL, 0);
mfd = fsmount(sfd, 0, MS_NODEV);
move_mount(mfd, "", AT_FDCWD, "/mnt", MOVE_MOUNT_F_EMPTY_PATH);
.fi
.in
.PP
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR mountpoint (1),
.BR fsconfig (2),
.BR fspick (2),
.BR move_mount (2),
.BR open_tree (2),
.BR umount (2),
.BR mount_namespaces (7),
.BR path_resolution (7),
.BR mount (8),
.BR umount (8)
