'\" t
.\" Copyright (c) 1995 Jim Van Zandt <jrv@vanzandt.mv.com> and aeb
.\" Sun Feb 26 11:46:23 MET 1995
.\"
.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: GPL-2.0-or-later
.\"
.\" Modified, Sun Feb 26 15:04:20 1995, faith@cs.unc.edu
.\" Modified, Thu Apr 20 22:08:17 1995, jrv@vanzandt.mv.com
.\" Modified, Mon Sep 18 22:32:47 1995, hpa@storm.net (H. Peter Anvin)
.\"
.TH ioctl_console 2 (date) "Linux man-pages (unreleased)"
.SH NAME
ioctl_console \- ioctls for console terminal and virtual consoles
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
.B #include <sys/ioctl.h>
.P
.BI "int ioctl(int " fd ", unsigned long " op ", void *" argp );
.fi
.SH DESCRIPTION
The following Linux-specific
.BR ioctl (2)
operations are supported for console terminals and virtual consoles.
.TP
.B KDGETLED
.TQ
.B KDSETLED
.TQ
.B KDGKBLED
.TQ
.B KDSKBLED
.TQ
.B KDGKBTYPE
.TQ
.B KDADDIO
.TQ
.B KDDELIO
.TQ
.B KDENABIO
.TQ
.B KDDISABIO
.TQ
.B KDSETMODE
.TQ
.B KDGETMODE
.TQ
.B KDMKTONE
.TQ
.B KIOCSOUND
.TQ
.B GIO_CMAP
.TQ
.B PIO_CMAP
.TQ
.B GIO_FONT
.TQ
.B GIO_FONTX
.TQ
.B PIO_FONT
.TQ
.B PIO_FONTX
.TQ
.B PIO_FONTRESET
.TQ
.B GIO_SCRNMAP
.TQ
.B GIO_UNISCRNMAP
.TQ
.B PIO_SCRNMAP
.TQ
.B PIO_UNISCRNMAP
.TQ
.B GIO_UNIMAP
.TQ
.B PIO_UNIMAP
.TQ
.B PIO_UNIMAPCLR
.TQ
.B KDGKBMODE
.TQ
.B KDSKBMODE
.TQ
.B KDGKBMETA
.TQ
.B KDSKBMETA
.TQ
.B KDGKBENT
.TQ
.B KDSKBENT
.TQ
.B KDGKBSENT
.TQ
.B KDSKBSENT
.TQ
.B KDGKBDIACR
.TQ
.B KDGETKEYCODE
.TQ
.B KDSETKEYCODE
.TQ
.B KDSIGACCEPT
See
.BR ioctl_kd (2).
.TP
.B TIOCLINUX
.TP
.B VT_OPENQRY
.TQ
.B VT_GETMODE
.TQ
.B VT_SETMODE
.TQ
.B VT_GETSTATE
.TQ
.B VT_RELDISP
.TQ
.B VT_ACTIVATE
.TQ
.B VT_WAITACTIVE
.TQ
.B VT_DISALLOCATE
.TQ
.B VT_RESIZE
.TQ
.B VT_RESIZEX
See
.BR ioctl_vt (2).
.SH RETURN VALUE
On success, 0 is returned (except where indicated).
On failure, \-1 is returned, and
.I errno
is set to indicate the error.
.SH ERRORS
.TP
.B EBADF
The file descriptor is invalid.
.TP
.B EINVAL
The file descriptor or
.I argp
is invalid.
.TP
.B ENOTTY
The file descriptor is not associated with a character special device,
or the specified operation does not apply to it.
.SH NOTES
.BR Warning :
Do not regard this man page as documentation of the Linux console ioctls.
This is provided for the curious only, as an alternative to reading the
source.
Ioctl's are undocumented Linux internals, liable to be changed
without warning.
(And indeed, this page more or less describes the
situation as of kernel version 1.1.94;
there are many minor and not-so-minor
differences with earlier versions.)
.P
Very often, ioctls are introduced for communication between the
kernel and one particular well-known program (fdisk, hdparm, setserial,
tunelp, loadkeys, selection, setfont, etc.), and their behavior will be
changed when required by this particular program.
.P
Programs using these ioctls will not be portable to other versions
of UNIX, will not work on older versions of Linux, and will not work
on future versions of Linux.
.P
Use POSIX functions.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR TIOCLINUX (2const),
.BR dumpkeys (1),
.BR kbd_mode (1),
.BR loadkeys (1),
.BR mknod (1),
.BR setleds (1),
.BR setmetamode (1),
.BR execve (2),
.BR fcntl (2),
.BR ioctl_tty (2),
.BR ioctl_kd (2),
.BR ioctl_vt (2),
.BR ioperm (2),
.BR termios (3),
.BR console_codes (4),
.BR mt (4),
.BR sd (4),
.BR tty (4),
.BR ttyS (4),
.BR vcs (4),
.BR vcsa (4),
.BR charsets (7),
.BR mapscrn (8),
.BR resizecons (8),
.BR setfont (8)
