.\" Copyright, The authors of the Linux man-pages project
.\"
.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: Linux-man-pages-copyleft
.\"
.TH string 3 (date) "Linux man-pages (unreleased)"
.SH NAME
stpcpy, strcasecmp, strcat, strchr, strcmp, strcoll, strcpy, strcspn,
strdup, strfry, strlen, strncat, strncmp, strncpy, strncasecmp, strpbrk,
strrchr, strsep, strspn, strstr, strtok, strxfrm, index, rindex
\- string operations
.SH LIBRARY
Standard C library
.RI ( libc ,\~ \-lc )
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B #include <strings.h>
.TP
.BR strcasecmp (3)
Compare two strings,
ignoring case.
.TP
.BR strncasecmp (3)
Compare the first bytes of two strings,
ignoring case.
.TP
.BR index (3)
Identical to
.BR strchr (3).
.TP
.BR rindex (3)
Identical to
.BR strrchr (3).
.P
.B #include <string.h>
.TP
.BR stpcpy (3)
Copy a string,
returning a pointer to the end of the resulting string.
.TP
.BR strcat (3)
Append a string into an existing string.
.TP
.BR strchr (3)
Find the first occurrence of a character
in a string.
.TP
.BR strcmp (3)
Compare two strings.
.TP
.BR strcoll (3)
Compare two strings,
using the current locale.
.TP
.BR strcpy (3)
Copy a string.
.TP
.BR strcspn (3)
Calculate the length of the initial segment of a string
which does not contain any of the rejected bytes.
.TP
.BR strdup (3)
Duplicate a string
in memory allocated using
.BR malloc (3).
.TP
.BR strfry (3)
Randomly swap the characters in a string.
.TP
.BR strlen (3)
Return the length of a string.
.TP
.BR strncat (3)
Append non-null bytes from an array
to a string,
and null-terminate the result.
.TP
.BR strncmp (3)
Compare the first bytes of two strings.
.TP
.BR strpbrk (3)
Find the first occurrence in a string
of one of the bytes in the accepted bytes.
.TP
.BR strrchr (3)
Find the last occurrence of a character
in a string.
.TP
.BR strsep (3)
Extract the initial field in a string
that is delimited by one of the delimiter bytes.
.TP
.BR strspn (3)
Calculate the length of the initial segment of a string
that consists entirely of accepted bytes.
.TP
.BR strstr (3)
Find the first occurrence of a substring
in a string.
.TP
.BR strtok (3)
Extract tokens from a string
that are delimited by one of the delimiter bytes.
.TP
.BR strxfrm (3)
Transforms a string
to the current locale
and copies the first bytes to a buffer.
.TP
.BR strncpy (3)
Fill a fixed-size buffer with leading non-null bytes from a source array,
padding with null bytes as needed.
.SH DESCRIPTION
The string functions perform operations on null-terminated
strings.
See the individual man pages for descriptions of each function.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR bstring (3),
.BR stpcpy (3),
.BR strcasecmp (3),
.BR strcat (3),
.BR strchr (3),
.BR strcmp (3),
.BR strcoll (3),
.BR strcpy (3),
.BR strcspn (3),
.BR strdup (3),
.BR strfry (3),
.BR strlen (3),
.BR strncasecmp (3),
.BR strncat (3),
.BR strncmp (3),
.BR strncpy (3),
.BR strpbrk (3),
.BR strrchr (3),
.BR strsep (3),
.BR strspn (3),
.BR strstr (3),
.BR strtok (3),
.BR strxfrm (3)
