.\" Copyright, The authors of the Linux man-pages project
.\"
.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: GPL-2.0-or-later
.\"
.TH memusagestat 1 (date) "Linux man-pages (unreleased)"
.SH NAME
memusagestat \- generate graphic from memory profiling data
.SH SYNOPSIS
.SY memusagestat
.RI [ option \~.\|.\|.\&]
.I datafile
.RI [ outfile ]
.YS
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B memusagestat
creates a PNG file containing a graphical representation of the
memory profiling data in the file
.IR datafile ;
that file is generated via the
.I \-d
(or
.IR \-\-data )
option of
.BR memusage (1).
.P
The red line in the graph shows the heap usage (allocated memory)
and the green line shows the stack usage.
The x-scale is either the number of memory-handling function calls or
(if the
.I \-t
option is specified)
time.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BI \-o\~ file
.TQ
.BI \-\-output= file
Name of the output file.
.TP
.BI \-s\~ string
.TQ
.BI \-\-string= string
Use
.I string
as the title inside the output graph.
.TP
.B \-t
.TQ
.B \-\-time
Use time (rather than number of function calls) as the scale for the X axis.
.TP
.B \-T
.TQ
.B \-\-total
Also draw a graph of total memory consumption.
.TP
.BI \-x\~ size
.TQ
.BI \-\-x\-size= size
Make the output graph
.I size
pixels wide.
.TP
.BI \-y\~ size
.TQ
.BI \-\-y\-size= size
Make the output graph
.I size
pixels high.
.TP
.B \-?
.TQ
.B \-\-help
Print a help message and exit.
.TP
.B \-\-usage
Print a short usage message and exit.
.TP
.B \-V
.TQ
.B \-\-version
Print version information and exit.
.SH BUGS
To report bugs, see
.UR http://www.gnu.org/software/libc/bugs.html
.UE
.SH EXAMPLES
See
.BR memusage (1).
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR memusage (1),
.BR mtrace (1)
